# NLU Selected Past Paper Questions

Source note: questions selected from the three NLU exam papers referenced in the exam guidance image.

Local source PDFs:

- `NLU-2025-INFR11157-INFR11225-full.pdf`
- `NLU-2024-INFR11225-full.pdf`
- `NLU-2023-INFR11157-INFR11225-full.pdf`

Selected-page PDFs:

- `NLU-2025-selected-pages-Q1-Q2-Q3g-j.pdf`
- `NLU-2024-selected-pages-Q2b-Q3.pdf`
- `NLU-2023-selected-pages-Q3.pdf`

## NLU 2025

Selected: Q1, Q2, Q3(g), Q3(j)

### Q1

Laura was asked to construct an algorithm that would "watermark" large language model text, so text generated by an LLM can later be automatically identified by another verification algorithm. Laura thought about the following algorithm. Given a language model, the algorithm works by apriori dividing its vocabulary set into two subsets of roughly equal probability (0.5) by estimating a word probability based on counts from a large corpus. The two sets are: one set of "green" tokens and one set of "red" tokens. Then, given a prompt, the LLM is constrained to only generate text using the green tokens. Following that modification to the LLM, Laura's idea was to test, for any text, whether it uses green tokens only. If it does, then we can classify it as generated by the LLM.

1. Explain in two sentences one major disadvantage of this algorithm. Will it work in practice? `[3 marks]`
2. Laura further decided to improve her algorithm, and rather than dividing the vocabulary set apriori, her algorithm now divides the vocabulary set into a set of green and red tokens per prompt, randomly as in her original algorithm, independently of the prompt. What is the major issue with this new modification? `[3 marks]`
3. Suggest an alternative that you expect would work well, and overcome both the first disadvantage and the second disadvantage in the above subquestions (a) and (b). You can base your answer on an existing algorithm described in class. `[5 marks]`
4. Note briefly one disadvantage of the algorithm you proposed. `[4 marks]`

### Q2

Alex is working for an international firm that wants to provide a reliable open-domain question answering (QA) system. They decide to frame the task as a retrieval augmented generation (RAG) system based on Wikipedia. Please answer the following questions being as concise as possible. Please do not write more than one or two sentences per mark assigned.

1. Explain one advantage and two disadvantages of using RAG over directly querying a large language model trained on Wikipedia. `[6 marks]`
2. The QA product took only the English wikipedia as its data source, and to serve their Arabic speaking customers they translated queries from Arabic into English, and then they translated answers from English into Arabic. Please describe and explain any problems that they might have encountered with the quality of the answers returned using this approach. Please comment on the ethical risks with this approach. `[2 marks]`
3. Please suggest two ways Alex could incorporate the non-English Wikipedia articles into the QA system and the advantages and disadvantages of these two methods. `[4 marks]`
4. Using an example, describe what problems the system would encounter when searching for answers to questions where information is likely to be very different between English Wikipedia and Arabic Wikipedia. Think about how a system could handle these discrepancies in a way that is useful for a user. `[3 marks]`

### Q3(g)

In the Word Embeddings Association Test (WEAT) we have embeddings for two groups (male and female names), and two stereotypes (science terms and family terms). We are measuring:

A. If female names are closer to family terms than science terms.

B. If male names are closer to family terms than science terms.

C. If male names are closer to science terms than to family terms, when compared to female names.

D. A. and C.

### Q3(j)

Which of the following statements about the Natural Questions (NQ) dataset is TRUE?

A. The dataset consists only of manually written questions without any connection to real-world queries.

B. It includes questions naturally asked by users on Google Search, along with corresponding Wikipedia passages.

C. Natural Questions only provides binary yes/no answers for all questions.

D. The dataset exclusively contains short factoid-style answers with no long-form responses.

## NLU 2024

Selected: Q2(b), Q3

### Q2(b)

You want to develop a machine translation system for Wolof -> English. Wolof is spoken by over 5 million people in Senegal, the Gambia, and Mauritania, but there is very little data for training the model, only a few thousand sentences of Wolof-English translation pairs. You do however have access to a Wolof corpus taken from Wikipedia with about 100,000 sentences. None of these questions should require more than a few sentences.

1. You train a Wolof -> English machine translation encoder-decoder model on the parallel data but performance is terrible. How can you use the monolingual data to improve performance? Please write about two sentences, each containing one idea that will address this question. How can you use data from other parallel datasets (which will likely contain English but will not contain Wolof) to improve performance? Explain one idea that will address this question. `[3 marks]`
2. You decide to explore the Wolof -> English translation performance of a large language model (LLM), but no LLMs have been trained with Wolof data. How can you fine-tune an LLM to be able to translate from Wolof -> English? Please write three high-level ideas to address this problem. `[3 marks]`
3. Describe the input and output of the COMET score. `[1 mark]`
4. Why could the COMET score be unreliable for testing an English -> Wolof translation model? Would there be any difference in COMET reliability when evaluating a Wolof -> English system? `[2 marks]`
5. If an immigration service were to rely on this automatic translation model to translate asylum claims, describe how this could cause harm, and what type of harm could it cause. `[1 mark]`

### Q3(a)

You are developing a question-answering (QA) system. Your task is to design an efficient way to provide context to the model that improves its ability to answer questions about a specific domain. More specifically, you are focusing on trivia question answering: given a trivia question, the model needs to produce the corresponding answer.

Example input/output pairs:

- Input: In what year did World War II end?
  Desired model output: 1945.
- Input: Who painted the Mona Lisa?
  Desired model output: Leonardo da Vinci.
- Input: How many elements are there in the periodic table?
  Desired model output: 118.

The model needs to answer each question without any supporting document or paragraph: we are in an open-domain question answering setting.

1. You are implementing the QA system using in-context learning (ICL) with an underlying large language model (LLM), for example, LLaMA2 70B. Describe how you would structure the input to the model to maximize the effectiveness of in-context learning for this domain-specific QA system: write about two sentences about how you would prompt the model for implementing a QA system using ICL, describing the format of the input and its characteristics, and then provide a brief example. Describe how you would select and format the context provided to the model; you can illustrate your approach using the examples above. Finally, discuss a potential challenge of using in-context learning for domain-specific QA regarding context length. `[4 marks]`
2. In addition to in-context learning, you also want to try implementing the QA system by performing a full fine-tuning of the parameters of the LLM. How do you define the input and output data for the fine-tuning? What kind of training objective would you use? How would you decide which system to use in production: your system trained via in-context learning or the one trained via full fine-tuning? `[4 marks]`

### Q3(b)

Parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods, such as adapter modules, have been proposed to customize pre-trained LLMs for specific tasks without the need to fine-tune the entire model. Assume you have decided to use LoRA to fine-tune a pre-trained model for your domain-specific QA system.

1. Explain the concept of adapter modules and how they can be integrated into a pre-trained model for fine-tuning a pre-trained LLM on the QA task; write two or three sentences. Write the equations of the LoRA adapter and how it can be used for updating the key, query, and value parameters, denoted by Wk, Wq, and Wv, and describe them in one or two sentences. `[4 marks]`
2. Compare the computational costs of inference and training of using adapter modules for fine-tuning on the QA task, as opposed to full model fine-tuning; answer in two or three sentences. Then, discuss how in-context learning can contribute to reducing the computational resources required for developing and deploying NLP models; answer briefly in one or two sentences. `[3 marks]`

## NLU 2023

Selected: Q3

### Q3

You are working with the BBC and want to develop an English-Yoruba translation model for BBC Monitoring. Yoruba is from the Edekiri family of languages and spoken widely in Nigeria and Benin. It is a very distant language from English, which is in the Germanic language family. What makes the task even harder is that there are very few freely available resources to support training an English-Yoruba translation model. You have managed to create a small test set of translated sentences from websites which you know contain English-Yoruba translations. But you would like to look for more English-Yoruba parallel sentences, and you have access to a large crawl of the internet.

1. What are the major steps to create a parallel English-Yoruba corpus from this crawl? `[2 marks]`
2. Why is it especially difficult to find parallel data for a low-resource language pair from internet crawls? `[1 mark]`
3. You have now found 20,000 sentences of parallel English-Yoruba data from the crawl, and you train a translation model on this data. Unfortunately looking at the output of your translation model, the quality is really poor. You go back to your crawl of the internet and extract all the monolingual Yoruba data, about 100,000 sentences. What could you do to improve your English-Yoruba translation model performance with this monolingual data? `[4 marks]`
4. You decide to see if transfer learning from a high quality, high resource language pair would improve performance. There are no high resource related language pairs, so you select a German-English translation model to initialise your English-Yoruba system. How would you train a BPE subword level vocabulary for a system that covers English, German and Yoruba? What problem could occur with this multilingual BPE vocabulary? `[2 marks]`
5. What are two advantages of BPE over modelling the vocabulary at the word level, with backoff to UNK? `[2 marks]`
6. What are two ways of automatically evaluating the quality of your English-Yoruba system? Please briefly explain each metric. `[2 marks]`
7. Name one disadvantage of each of these automatic evaluation methodologies? `[2 marks]`
8. Before deploying your system in the newsroom, what kind of human evaluation would be most valuable and why? `[2 marks]`

